well Israeli forces have fire tear gas
at dozens of Palestinians trying to
enter the old city in occupi Jerusalem
they were attempting to reach alak a
mosque for Friday prayers uh the Hamas
group name its military operation
against Israel alaxa flood as a response
to Israeli attacks on worshippers at the
mosque the Alexa mosque compound is one
of the Hol sites for Muslims Jews and
Christians it also symbolizes the daily
injustices faced by the Palestinian in
occupied East Jerusalem and its legal
status has been well a constant flash
point alexer is Islam's thirdd Hol site
Jews refer to it as Temple Mount and
believe that two biblical temples once
stood there it's home to the Dome of the
Rock where Muslims believe the prophet
Muhammad ascended to Heaven it's
sometimes confused with the mosque but
the mosque itself lies here at the
southern end of the compound only
Muslims are allowed to pray in its
compound and then there's the Western
Wall where Jews from around the world
come to pray they believe it's the
remains of an ancient Temple Sarah haret
joins us live from Lion gate another
gate gate in The Old City to occupied
East Jerusalem so uh sah tell us about
the security situation where you
are yeah uh I just want to give you a
backgrounder as to what lion gate is
lion gate is one of seven Gates that
allows you into Al AXA MOS compound it's
an area that includes Al
mosque now we came earlier it was very
very quiet you can clearly see that
security is stepped up though and
initially we were being told by some uh
of the Palestinian Muslim worshippers
that they were uh not allowing certain
ages in uh that number has varied
however speaking to a lot of the locals
they're saying that uh most of the
youngsters uh certainly under the age of
35 haven't been allowed to the prayers
because of the situation at the moment
we ourselves witness some of the women
being turned away some of the youngsters
being turned away um some people
including for example uh an older male
he told me he was 66 from an area called
silwan now silwan has been a hot spot
for tensions between uh Palestinians uh
as well as Israeli Security Forces here
in Old Jerusalem but I actually want you
to speak we want to speak to halem who's
just come out from that Friday prayer um
Halen can you tell us what's the
situation for Palestinians certainly
from Jerusalem that are wanting to pray
here at ala mosque um this has happened
before where they've prevented people of
certain ages from entering I'm talking
about the Israeli Security Forces is it
any different today when you entered and
what was your experience coming in it
Tru you know today is Friday and we come
here to to pray Friday praying and uh
once I got from outside I faced three
checkpoints actually and they just
hosted you know they KT us um for half
an hour then because we are you know
above 50 years old they let us go inside
and once we get you know the first
checkpoint we go to the second
checkpoint and then here they stop us
here and they check my bag what I hold
and so on and so forth so we get in
inside the the mosque and un teally
there there's no there only a few
prayers inside the mosque because they
didn't let you know prayers Muslim
prayers to get and to pray freely in the
I I spoke to a Palestinian uh in a
wheelchair that had to uh pray just
further down there um because it was
difficult for him to enter um and he
said that it's really quiet here uh
today which is very unusual because of
course AKA MOS is the third holiest site
for Muslims um are you concern concerned
about moving forward after the situation
and and Israel declaring war as a as a
jerus as someone who is from Jerusalem
you were telling me what is the
situation for you right now and in terms
of movement are people staying at home
can you tell me more about that
experience absolutely you know the
situation is so
tense for example I have a boy he's like
16 years old I keep him all the time at
home I don't let him go outside even to
to buy anything from any Europe
Supermarket or some something else
because you know the Israeli police uh
policemen the Israeli security
uh I don't know they they check
everybody they harass every every single
every single Palestinian in Jerusalem
and they don't hesitate even to shoot to
shoot young Palestinians for nothing for
for for I don't know maybe no no reason
yeah okay well I just also um thank you
very much halem for speaking to us um of
course we were just down I just want to
turn around here if Marina can show you
just to give you an idea of where we are
this is uh the old wall that surrounds
the old uh City I'll just move out of
the way there and further down on the
left is actually the Greek Orthodox
church and we spoke to them earlier of
course tensions last week were high for
them with Israeli settlers spitting at
churches we've seen arise in those
incidences and he said they're concerned
in fact that church is um said to be the
birthplace of Mary a mother of uh Jesus
and it's a very considered a very holy
site for Christians as well I'm just
going to take you down this Lane over
here because this is another area where
the um secur Israeli security forces
have were preventing um the youngsters
from entering they've actually moved a
lot of uh the barricades but you know uh
there's a lot less that the moment
Security Forces we did see some scuffles
uh between them and if you move if you
just turn this way to the left here up
these stairs this is where a lot of the
youngsters ended up taking the steps up
there and had to just sort of pray on
the side of course this is not the first
time that we have been seeing this
happening uh for Friday prayers when it
comes to entry to Al AKA mosque but as I
said and as you heard from Hal there it
has been much quieter because a note was
sent out to say that youngsters under a
certain age should not be allowed uh to
pray andos because of course there are
fears of tensions Rising back to you
Nick sah thanks for that sah heart there
at Lion's gate The Old City at about
what 11 minute walk from there is
Damascus gate the other side of Old City
The Old City m j